Draft 1.4 Release Blog Post (#982)
quarto-dev/quarto-web: docs/blog/posts/2024-01-22-1.4-release/index.qmd

---
title: Quarto 1.4 
subtitle: Quarto 1.4 is released
description: |
  Quarto 1.4 brings new formats for dashboards and Typst, a new manuscript project type, a cross-reference overhaul, Shiny for Python support, and a ton of other updates.
categories:
  - Quarto 1.4
  - Releases
author: Charlotte Wickham
date: "01/22/2024"
image: "images/thumbnail.png"
image-alt: "Quarto 1.4 with a party popper"
---

> We are thrilled to let you know Quarto 1.4 has been officially released. You can grab the current release from <https://quarto.org/docs/download/>.

Reviewer: Exclamation point, to further highlight the 'thrilled' part? Or, maybe we lead with "Quarto 1.4 has officially been released! You can get the release..."

> This release is huge, and there are tons of new features. Some of the big ones we want to spotlight are: Dashboards, Cross-References, Manuscripts, Typst, and Inline Code Syntax.

Reviewer: Feels like this sentence is a tautology...the "release is huge" because "there are tons of new features", so we could say one or the other.

Are these features in the order of most impressive to least for the user? Meaning, will users care most about new dashboard formats and least about inline code syntax?

Author: It's so hard to order these features because of the interaction between audience size and feature size. But you make a good point, the order should at least be thoughtful. Dashboards should come first because it has a big audience and it's a big feature. I'll order the others on my best guess of audience size: Typst (anyone that generates PDF), Inline Code Syntax (this is mostly a big deal for people who render with jupyter), Cross-References (academic/technical writing), Manuscripts (people who write journal articles).

## Dashboards

> Quarto Dashboards streamline the creation of interactive dashboards giving you an effortless way to layout interactive components, visualizations, tabular data, and annotations. Here are some examples:

Reviewer: Should there be a comma between "dashboards" and "giving"?

> Quarto Dashboards streamline the creation of interactive dashboards giving you an effortless way to layout interactive components, visualizations, tabular data, and annotations. Here are some examples:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quarto Dashboards streamline the creation of interactive dashboards giving you an effortless way to lay out interactive components, visualizations, tabular data, and annotations. Here are some examples:
```

::: {layout-ncol="3"}
![](/docs/dashboards/examples/thumbnails/stock-explorer-dashboard.png){.border .lightbox group="dashboards" fig-alt="Screenshot of a Stock Trader dashboard: a row of three values boxes, then a row with a stock ticker graph and a table of closing values. Navy blue and green theme."}

![](/docs/dashboards/examples/thumbnails/customer-churn-dashboard.png){.border .lightbox group="dashboards" fig-alt="Screenshot of a Customer Churn dashboard: a row of three values boxes, then a row with two plots, then a row with a table. Light blue and yellow theme."}

![](/docs/dashboards/examples/thumbnails/penguins-dashboard.png){.border .lightbox group="dashboards" fig-alt="Screenshot of a Palmer Penguins dashboard: a sidebar with checkboxes and a dropdown, and two plots in main panel. Blue theme."}
:::

> For live versions of these dashboards, source code, and additional examples see the [examples gallery](/docs/dashboards/examples/index.qmd). When you are ready to get started head to [Dashboards](/docs/dashboards/index.qmd).

Reviewer: Instead of bringing up a large version of the PNG when the user clicks on a dashboard, could we just directly link them to the live example in the example gallery?

I would also clarify the sentence "When you are ready to get started, head to Dashboards" that the "ready to get started" means "when you're ready to code your own dashboard, head to the appropriate section of the docs"

## Cross-References

> Cross-references have had an overhaul in Quarto 1.4 enabling you to do things like:

Reviewer: I would change this to say "Cross-references have been overhauled in Quarto 1.4, enabling..."

> *   Flexibly define the content of float cross-references, things like figures, tables and code listings, with the new [Cross-Reference Div Syntax](/docs/authoring/cross-references-divs.qmd). For example, @tbl-table is an image treated like a table:

Reviewer: should "things like figures, tables and code listings" be a parenthesized e.g. statement?

"Flexibily define the content of float cross-references (e.g. figures, tables, code lists, etc.), with the new Cross-Reference Div Syntax"

    
    ::: {layout-ncol="2"}

    ````markdown
    ::: {#tbl-table}

    ![](table.png)

    An image treated like a table

    :::
    ````
    
    ::: {#tbl-table}

    ![](images/crossref-div-table.png)

    An image treated like a table

    :::

    :::
    

>     And notice if you hover over the reference as it appears in the text, you'll get a floating preview of the content---that's new too.

Reviewer: This isn't clear to me...should I be able to see this in the blog post, or within Quarto you would see that if you hover over the reference?

Author: Yeah, you should see this in the blog post. Re-wording to hopefully make this clearer.

> *   Define your own [custom types of float cross-reference](/docs/authoring/cross-references-custom.qmd), which you could use to create cross references to Videos, Diagrams or [Supplemental Figures](https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/cross-references-custom.html#example-supplemental-figures).

Reviewer: I would just make this "Define custom types"...the "your own" is implied with custom IMO

> *   Define your own [custom types of float cross-reference](/docs/authoring/cross-references-custom.qmd), which you could use to create cross references to Videos, Diagrams or [Supplemental Figures](https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/cross-references-custom.html#example-supplemental-figures).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   Define your own [custom types of float cross-reference](/docs/authoring/cross-references-custom.qmd), which you could use to create cross-references to Videos, Diagrams or [Supplemental Figures](https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/cross-references-custom.html#example-supplemental-figures).
```

> *   Cross-reference [executable code cells](/docs/authoring/cross-references.qmd#code-listings), [callouts](/docs/authoring/cross-references.qmd#callouts) and [Remarks and Solutions](/docs/authoring/cross-references.html#theorems-and-proofs).

Reviewer: Does "Remarks and Solutions" refer to something specific, such that it is a proper noun? Just stands out that those are capitalized, but executable code cells and callouts aren't

> Some of the cross-reference work has been behind the scenes which will make other changes to cross-references easier in future releases.

Reviewer: I think this can be removed, unless you're specifically teasing that more changes are coming to be excited about. If so, then maybe be more explicit and say "we're also working on the underlying code for cross-references, which will allow X, Y and Z to be improved in future releases"

## Manuscripts

Quarto manuscript projects provide a framework for writing and publishing scholarly articles. You can use notebooks (`.qmd` or `.ipynb`) as the source of content and computations, and then publish these computations alongside the manuscript, allowing readers to dive into your code.

> The output of a manuscript project is a website containing the article, accessible in multiple formats (e.g., LaTeX, MS Word) through a manuscript website:

Reviewer: Could we clarify this somehow? The output is "a website" (I assume HTML?), but what's a "manuscript website"? Is it a reference to an internal product, or just anywhere you can host HTML?

Author: Maybe confusing because the sentence was a mess.  Cleaned up a bit.

::: {layout="[[3,1]]"}

![Article Content](images/article-content.png){fig-alt="A screenshot of the content area on the manuscript webpage. Content shows a title block including the article title, authors, and abstract, body text, and an image with a caption." .border}

![Navigation](images/webpage-menu.png){fig-alt="A screenshot of the menu on the right hand side of the manuscript webpage. The menu has headings: Table of contents, Other Formats, Notebooks and Other Links." .border}

:::

Read more about manuscripts and how to get started at [Manuscripts](/docs/manuscripts/index.qmd).

## Typst

[Typst](https://github.com/typst/typst) is a new open-source markup-based typesetting system that is designed to be as powerful as LaTeX while being much easier to learn and use. Typst creates beautiful PDF output with blazing fast render times.

Quarto 1.4 includes the Typst CLI, so all you need to get started creating PDFs via Typst is to use `format: typst`: 

````{.markdown filename="hello-typst.qmd"}
---
title: "Hello Typst!"
format: typst
---

My first Typst document
````

> We are particularly excited about how easy it is to make templates for highly customized output with Typst. Here are some examples you can use in Quarto as [custom formats](/docs/output-formats/typst-custom.qmd):

Reviewer: Instead of "highly customized output", would it be more effective to say "...how easy it is to make templates for journal articles, conference posters, newsletters and more using custom formats:"

Author: Not quite because the templates are a Typst thing, whereas custom formats are a Quarto thing. Going with:

> ...how easy it is to make templates for journal articles, conference posters, newsletters and more with Typst. Here are some examples...

::: {layout-ncol=4}

![IEEE](images/typst-format-ieee.png){.lightbox group="custom-formats" fig-alt="Screenshot of a page showing a article styled according IEEE standards. The title is centered with authors below in two columns."}

![Poster](images/typst-format-poster.png){.lightbox group="custom-formats" fig-alt="Screenshot of a poster in landscape orientiation. The poster includes a logo in the top right, a title in the top left, and content arranged in three columns."}

![Letter](images/typst-format-letter.png){.lightbox group="custom-formats" fig-alt="Screenshot of a page showing a letter. A sender address is across the top of the page, followed by a recipient address left justified. The body of the letter includes a subject line in bold."}

![Dept News](images/typst-format-dept-news.png){.lightbox group="custom-formats" fig-alt="Screenshot of a page showing a department newsletter. The page is split vertically with a white column on the left and a red one on the right. An image spans across the column with the text \"Award Winning Science\" oriented to run vertically down its right side."}

:::

> Start your journey in [Typst Basics](/docs/output-formats/typst.qmd).

Reviewer: Similar to the one above, we should clarify that this is for when you're ready to start your Typst journey _within quarto_, just to highlight that the link will be taking the user to our documentation, not to the Typst website

````

This syntax works for any Jupyter kernel---so for Julia you would write an inline expression as `` `{julia} x` ``).

:::

::: {}

### Knitr

```` markdown
```{{r}}
radius <- 5
```

The radius of the circle is `{r} x`
````

:::

::: {}
### OJS

```` markdown
```{{ojs}}
radius = 5
```

The radius of the circle is `{ojs} x`
````
:::

:::

And don't worry if you are used to using `` `r ` `` that syntax remains fully supported. Read more at [Inline Code](/docs/computations/inline-code.qmd).

## Other Highlights

Some other highlights include:

-   [Shiny for Python](/docs/dashboards/interactivity/shiny-python/index.qmd)---Support for using Shiny for Python within Quarto documents. 

-   [Script Rendering](/docs/computations/render-scripts.qmd)---Render specially formatted `.py`, `.jl` and `.r` script files.
    
-   [Easy Binder Configuration for Quarto Projects](/docs/projects/binder.qmd)---Support for generating files required to deploy a Quarto project to [Binder](mybinder.org).

-   [Connect Email Generation](/docs/prerelease/1.4/email.qmd)[^email]---Extends the `html` output format so that HTML/text emails can be created and selectively delivered through Posit Connect.

> [^email]: The [quarto.org](https://quarto.org) highlight documentation will give you a good preview of the feature, but more complete docs are coming soon on [docs.posit.co/connect](https://docs.posit.co/connect/user/quarto/).

Reviewer 2: Should this link to https://quarto.org/docs/prerelease/1.4/email.html instead of the homepage?

Author: Probably, yeah.
